Well, this is your first novel in five years?
It is, indeed.
How does it feel to be, I guess, with the last work, you completed a trilogy?
I completed a trilogy, yeah.
And this is a standalone?
This is a one-off, yeah.
Perhaps we could talk about the impulse to do a book, a social commentary novel, it appears.
Is it a millennial kind of a thing, would you say?
I suppose everything is.
You could feel it peeping upon us.
I think it was really, because I hadn't written any fiction for five years because of working on something else, I think it was just a desire to sort of comment on things that had been happening while I wasn't looking and just get it all down.
You know, it's a slight feeling of fin de siècle, you know, this is the end of something and what comes next.
There certainly is humour in here, but is there anger as well?
There is anger, but it's not very personal anger.
It's quite detached anger.
I mean, I sort of feel, I don't feel personally very angry about things, but I feel angry on behalf of certain things that I've seen happening.
But of course, when I read this book, we were at the very
long, slow end of the Tory government.
So Britain has changed a bit since I wrote it.
So I was quite angry about quite a lot of things that were going on.
I wonder, because you've written in so many different forms, would it ever occur you to respond to social events in non-fiction, in essays?
Why is it that the novel seems most appropriate for you to respond to these developments?
Well, that's a very good question, and I don't know the answer.
I mean, I think that I enjoy writing fiction when it's going well, and it's a natural form to me.
I do do a bit of journalism in the UK, but I suppose I take a slightly longer perspective than daily journalism.
I find it very hard to respond to instant events
instantly.
So it's a bit of a longer season than that.
But I've often wondered why I've never thought of being more actively involved in politics.
And I think that, again, is something to do with the novelist distance, which is quite an ironic distance, really.
Is it coincidental that the witch of the title is a feminist critic?
I know that you've
You commented before, one of your earlier novels, I believe it was Waterfall, was the most female of your books.
Yes, yes.
And Middle Ground was a response to the feminist critics.
Yes, yes, that's true.
Well, feminism has been very much a feature of the landscape of my entire writing life.
When I started writing in the 60s, feminism was going new.
Certainly in England.
I mean, there have been a few months of Beauvoir in France, but there really was very little happening in England.
And so it's been there all the time.
And it's only gradually that you realise how different French feminism, English feminism, American feminism, how different all these manifestations are.
And I think in the middle ground, I was a little fed up with some commercial brands of American feminism.
which were a very aggressive kind of hyped-up, self-promoting kind of feminism, which was not what the feminist movement I'd been brought up with seemed to be about.
And I suppose in The Witch of Exmoor, she is fed up with the slowness of change, and I think that's what a lot of people feel as they get older, that those thought things would move along a bit.
And then you begin to think, well, they haven't actually moved anywhere, and something, you know, doing one's best for years, and nothing happens at all.
That's not quite true within feminism, but it's to another point.
But your response is to totally withdraw.
Yes, it is.
Well, one sees people do that.
And I have occasionally a deep impulse myself, which I never would follow, I don't think, but just a deep impulse to say to hell with all of you and go away and mind my own business.
But I think a lot of older people... I mean, I'm not as old as Frida, but she's not very old either.
She's only in her 60s.
I mean, she's quite young by modern standards.
But I think a whole lot of people have a kind of temptation to go and do that.
Chuck it all.
Yeah, Chuck it all is that.
Enough of all that.
Of course, that opening sequence there was... That film must be a play, couldn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
And you have done drama.
Would something like this work, do you think, as a play?
I have given up even trying to write drama.
I can't do it.
I think it's a very tight format, and I'm not very good at... Actually, having said that, I have got a play in my head at the moment, and I'm quite interested in having a go at it one day.
I have this one brilliant idea, because you know the problem is that there are no parts for actresses and no parts for aging women.
And I was just talking to some friends last summer, and suddenly I thought, oh, that would make a wonderful play.
I won't tell you what it is, because I'll probably never do it.
But I might one day have another go.
But the novel is a more natural form to me.
It's something I've grown up with, and it's a natural form.
Do you see it visually?
I always see it visually.
I always see everything visually.
But I don't see them in terms of confined to the stage.
I see a lot of landscape.
I see a lot of...
a lot of landscape.
I mean, I would find it hard to do without the landscape.
I mean, this gathering is really a perfect... Yes, it would.
This gathering of characters is almost a set piece, isn't it?
That's true.
I do see that as an opening sequence, perhaps even as a television sort of drama, in which you can have more landscape.
Do you agree with some of the reviewers that
that a number of these characters have caricatures?
Is that part of the...?
Um, yes, I haven't... I don't really read the news very much, but I mean, they are intended as caricatures.
I mean, it's not a very realistic novel.
It's a more of a sort of stable novel than a realistic novel.
I wish some of the critics would get that.
I know, people read very badly, I'm not trying to... People read very...
People read very prosaically.
They expect everything to be real.
And the point of a satire is that it satirizes, I think.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But they do expect, because the surface is reasonably realistic, they expect it to be real and individualized.
And in fact, one of the points of it is that people are tight, and they fall into typical processes.
And it hinders the whole process of
developing a character fully, shall we say.
A character does exist in a satire.
It's a specific purpose.
That makes sense to me.
Well, it does to some people, but not to everybody.
It's a question of reader expectations, really, what people are expecting.
Pardon me.
Did you have fun writing this novel?
Yes, I did.
It does seem to have a lot of good humor in it.
Where you've done work in so many different forms, though, did it feel like time for a novel?
I mean, yeah.
It did.
What had happened was that I spent five years working on a biography of Angus Warden.
Did you ever meet Angus?
I never did.
I mean, he was somebody I really very much admired as a writer and as a human being.
But I spent five years working on it, because it's a long time in your life.
When I got to the end of that, I wanted to do something short.
And this novel, although it's not very short, it's shorter than the last one or two I've written.
And I wanted it to be quite light in texture, which is why it's got the title it has and the ending it has.
So my hope was that people wouldn't take it too seriously.
I hope you call it The Witch of Exxon.
They wouldn't think it was a realistic novel, but no, no, they don't seem to get that.
So, yes, I wanted to have fun.
I wanted to write quite a playful novel, really.
After the strain of working on something that finally was rather depressing, because when you write about somebody who's old, then gets ill and then dies... In real life.
In real life.
As opposed to a character.
Exactly.
You feel really... I got really... I got really depressed by that.
And so this book was in a way a reply to that.
and the departure as well.
A sort of getting out of that.
Do you see now, because it is a rather extensive body of work, do you see it as a body of work, a corpus, shall we say?
I see, I do see reactions and developments and myself reacting again to the books before and I can remember how one book led to another which
when you're writing it, you can't quite see it.
But then you look back and you think, well, of course, that's how that moved on from there.
So I do see it.
I mean, I wouldn't use such a grand word, of course.
But it sounds good.
It sounds good.
At my age, I feel I've got a right to it.
It certainly is a body of work.
I did an interview with Nadine Gordomar.
She is of the opinion that everything she does is...
more or less the same work that you compared it to a sculpture that you look at from different angles of vision.
And that is interesting.
That is interesting.
Because I do know that I've had some obsessions and themes that I've followed through.
And every time I begin a book, I think I'm writing something different.
And then I find I'm actually coming back to the same.
Really?
I'm sort of coming back to the same theme, which is it
Inevitable.
It was one always going back to childhood's obsession, things that happened to you when you were very little.
In her case, I imagine, things that happened to her country.
And you just go back again and again.
Would you tinker with things if you had the chance?
Or is completed work in your view completed work?
I wouldn't go back.
I regret.
I mean, I think some things I didn't do as well as I could have done, and some things
I wouldn't want to have to really read them.
I wouldn't have to like to look at them again.
But I wouldn't want to work on the same book.
I'd rather treat the same subject differently.
Was it Henry James when he was reading the prefaces for the New York condition, you know, went in and started fooling around with...
I think Wordsworth was in it.
Wordsworth was revoked.
It did, and he got worse as he went wrong.
There's a warning in that, because I actually think the only version is better.
It is.
It's a question.
It's one of my favorite questions, because it's amazing.
I know when William Kennedy was given an opportunity to bring out a new edition of The Ink Truck, his first novel, and he said, that really is my first novel.
It is a first novel, and it reads like a first novel.
But he said the temptation wasn't there.
That's who I was at that point.
Yes, exactly.
And you have to say that's who I was and that was.
On the other hand, with somebody like Michael with a biography, now have you seen him over the... You see, that is different.
That's totally different.
Because whole new materials come along and... And you make a few little errors that you want to make right.
Of course, of course.
I had a book published two years ago.
It's still in print, my sixth printing.
Which has given me the opportunity to go in and correct little things that you want to do.
But that's a work of non-fiction.
But that's non-fiction.
It's a completely different thing.
I mean, I think that tampering with your fiction is like sort of, it's like betraying your earlier self.
Yourself.
But with non-fiction, I have to do next year, I have to spend time redoing the Oxford companion to English literature, which is...
A very useful book.
And of course that has to be redone because it's well out of date now.
And of course, as you were saying, every printing, I'm afraid, mistakes have to be corrected every time it reads.
Regardless of how carefully it's written.
And some of them weren't even mistakes at the time.
It's just that new information comes up and you realize that some people lied about their birth defects or all sorts of things come up.
We'll be doing a new edition of my book in 1999, a paperback.
Coming up in 1999?
Well, because I have a new book coming out then, so they want to bring out the paperback then.
And I really want to go in, because new information has come to light.
I had a person who had the secret to him was that he had an alias.
I won't go into great detail, but it was still unresolved questions.
And lo and behold, the great answer to him, which came as a response from a reader,
There's a third alias, and that's the secret to the whole man.
And that came from a reader.
A reader who saw me interviewed on television and called me from Kansas and directed me to a court case several thousand miles away, and there was a deposition that provided the secret to this guy.
Which you've been looking for.
Which I've been looking for all over America, but not in Kansas.
But not in Kansas.
And this person just happened to see you on television.
I was interviewed on Book Notes, a program, a C-SPAN.
And it played once, and it was played again by a popular demand on Christmas week.
And this lawyer, who happened to be looking for football games... Ah, so it wasn't...
That he was looking for your subject?
No, he didn't.
It was random.
He was random, and he heard the name Haven No More come up.
Right.
Which is an anagram for Have No More.
This man called himself Have No More.
Yeah, yeah.
And what I determined what his name is is actually Haven More changed, but the real secret to the guy is that he was Richard More.
His birth name, which would have led me through Freedom of Information Act files.
You just got back through the real... To find everything about him and...
fascinating character.
But anyway, I want to get all of this into the, not all of it, but some of it.
Into the next thing.
People are always asking me, what's the story with this guy Omar?
Did you find out who he really is?
It's very satisfying that a member of
You're sort of public.
It's wonderful.
I mean, it makes one feel really it's a collaborative effort, and the people out there are really, it's exciting.
I think it saved my life, because this guy was threatening me with a $15 million bill.
And claiming that I had factually incorrect things about him, but in fact, it's been quite correct.
It's just that we didn't know about the third alias.
We knew that he had been in the military in 1944 and that he was mustered out within nine months, possibly.
It turns out that he was 15 years old and he lied about his age.
But in his treaty to us, he said, that couldn't possibly be me.
I was only 15 years old in 1944.
Lo and behold, the deposition in Kansas says he ran away from home at the age of 13.
Lied about his age and joined the army at the age of fifteen.
So he was.
Yeah, he was.
So this guy saved me for a great day.
And he was a lawyer, you said, of course, in the contract.
A lawyer for this guy.
Yeah, that's right.
He was somewhat of a breach of—the guy's a sociopath.
But what he did is he used twenty million dollars of another man's money to build a great library.
I wrote a book about bibliomania.
Anyway, we don't want to talk about me, but I'm sorry to go off in this direction.
But I do want to ask you a question, because I'm working on a new book which does embrace this whole concept of book culture and reading in books.
Do you have thoughts on the novel as we approach this?
I have lots of thoughts, and I've been being forced to have lots of thoughts.
Because there are things that have been happening in England, and now you will know the reading of the old British Museum.
It's about support.
That's sad.
How do you feel about it?
Well, I feel it's sad, but I also feel they desperately needed a new library.
And I've been to the new library.
Exactly.
I'm in favour of the new library.
I'm very sad the old one is closing.
Centered around this, there's been an awful lot of sentiment and also seminars about the future of reading, the future of books, the future of information technology.
There's been a lot of that going on, so I've been having to think about it.
And I just come from New York.
As you walk through New York, you see so many information technology shops, shops of computers, shops of computers.
You see one or two Barnes and Noble, but most of it is selling other kinds of stuff.
Look at the ads in the New York Times.
Switch on telly.
What do you see being advertised?
Now, it's very interesting.
I just went on to the... Because I'm doing the Oxford Companion next year, I thought I'd really better get myself on the internet because it'll save me a lot of time with really quite dreary bibliography.
It really is.
And it's well worth it.
But I now understand things on the advert that were completely
gobbled it up to me until I tried to learn to do it myself.
And it's as though you've acted another language, another culture altogether, because you know what Yahoo is, and you know what all these weird words.
I didn't know what we were talking about to begin with.
And now I'm not very good at this yet, but at least I know what it is that we're talking about.
And for a certain sense, it's extremely useful.
Really, I can call the New York Times magazine
I can call the Times in London.
And I can search 50,000 book reviews.
I did this this morning on Margaret Frappell, just to go through the reviews that they've published of your books over the last 15 years or so, just to refresh myself.
And whatever interviews have been published with you, features, they're all
I can get them in five minutes.
Well, you're cleverer than me, because I don't know where they all are.
I don't know if I want to know.
I don't know if I have a need to look.
But, I mean, it is totally useful for this kind of thing.
I mean, the first time I used it, really, I was going to a conference in Strasbourg, and there was a writer there who I'd never heard of, but I knew he was frankly famous.
And it turned out the reason why I hadn't heard him, because he was a French-language, West Indian writer.
And so when I discovered that, I didn't feel so embarrassed that I did manage to print out an article on him, which meant that when I met him, I knew who he was.
I'd read one of these poems.
I actually knew his face was a little thick.
And I thought, well, that's wonderful.
Because I'd never have found that information in London.
It just wouldn't have existed in London.
So it's beautiful.
I've been to the British Library, the New French Library.
I haven't seen that.
Just last week I was at the new German library, and I went up to Leipzig where they're preserving all the old books.
So I'm really concerning myself with digitization of books, which is happening, or also preserving books.
The whole section.
I'm also interested in concepts of the canon.
And here you are, editing another companion to English literature, which is basically a canonical
It is.
It's like Wikipedia.
Do you have thoughts on the canon, I wonder?
Is it a changing canon?
It is changing.
Yes, it's changing all the time.
I mean, the past changes, there's been some quite surprising shifts.
I mean, the first Oxford one was done in 1932, and there's been some enormous shifts of emphasis since then.
But it's interesting how some areas don't change at all.
Walter Scott is still canonical, although nobody reads it.
Well, that's an exaggeration.
Some people read him.
But he's still considered somebody who should be in there.
How do you explain that?
Because he was, at the beginning of the novel, he was important historically.
He's much more referred to than read.
And there are some figures like that.
And in fact, you need them in a reference book, more than the books that people read every day.
Because, you know, people talk about the Waverley novels they're still referred to.
People don't know what they are, so they need to look them up to find out what they are.
Who reads the Fairy Queen today, I wonder.
I don't know, but they certainly need to know, they need to look it up from time to time.
I wonder who does.
It bothers me that here in the United States, you can get a degree in English, and I was an English major.
You can get a degree in literature, English literature, without being required to have studied Shakespeare.
That bothers me.
That is bothering me.
Shakespeare, Chaucer, Spencer, Milton, you take what you want.
Call that degree literature if you want, but call it English literature to be certified as proficient in English literature.
I've never done Shakespeare.
Not saying you didn't do it, but you were required to do it.
I went to this seminar in the New British Library last month, and they were talking about exactly this sort of issue, about whether you should teach children
accessible or inaccessible, whether you should, you know, make them look at the canon.
And one woman said, she had a colleague of her, she was a teacher, she said, I heard her saying, I've got to teach Shakespeare next year and I don't want to.
And she said, the poor children were being taught by that woman who didn't want to teach it.
And then you don't know what to do.
I mean, the lack of motivation is very sad because, I mean, I...
I felt sitting there, I'd love to go and teach some tricks.
I'd love to have half an hour to try and persuade, and it's exciting.
I have a 16-year-old daughter who was a junior in high school last year.
She was a sophomore, and she was reading Macbeth.
And the great joy for me was we read it out loud together.
And she went in, and I explained it for her, and she, of course, the teacher said, Barbara, how do you know this play so far?
And she said, oh, my father and I read it together, you know.
Well, that's a great pleasure to be able to do that.
Well, how could anybody be put off by the prospect of everything to deal with Shakespeare?
It's amazing to me.
I know, because it's hard.
It's hard.
But are you alert to this debate in this country over the canon?
The canon is no more, and the Harold Bloom way to do for this new book by them.
I would be interested in using some of these quotations in this book, because it is very pertinent, especially where you are.
working on the actual companion to... Well, I mean, my view is that you shouldn't... that the canon of the past exists, and it shifts.
I mean, new writers... I mean, publishers like Virago Press changed the canon of late 19th century women's writing.
They republished a lot of... You know, which press is this one?
Virago.
Virago, sorry.
And they were founded in 1970...
I think probably.
They are actually mentioned in the alphabet.
Or maybe they're under feminist publishing.
I'm not sure.
But anyway, they did change.
They changed retrospectively the canon of women writers.
And writers like The Year of Britain, Testament of Youth, Testament of Friendship, all those books came back into print.
And they're now much better known than they were 30 years ago.
So you can actually put things back into it.
You can expand the canon in the past.
Things get lost from the canon, and I don't know quite what I feel about that.
But I am now, even now, I'm beginning, I'm really not supposed to start work towards January, but I'm starting a sort of headword list of meaning writers.
And every time I see something interesting in the paper, I think, well, I'll just put that on my computer and see how that name stands up when I look at it more closely.
Can you give me a couple of examples?
Yes.
Do you mind, by the way, if I contact you at a later point?
Not at all, not at all.
Now, it's quite obvious, for example, that Jim Crates, who was shortlisted for the Booker, will go in.
But what about Adyaraty Roy, who won the Booker?
It's her first novel.
I haven't read it yet.
So we wait and see what happens in the next two or three years.
Anyway, I haven't read it.
Well, but does the Booker automatically get you listed?
Well, the Booker automatically gets you listed.
Exactly.
But then there are writers like, now, who was I?
Now, there's a writer I really admire myself called Edward St.
Orbin.
And he hasn't had anything like the coverage.
He's a friend and a contemporary of Will Self, who everybody talks about.
He has a very high profile.
Edward St.
Orbin never appeared.
He's never interviewed, never done anything.
But I would like to put him into the Oxford St.
Daniels just because I admire his work and see what happens.
But I shall sit on that one for a bit.
He's on my list.
Now what do you mean by see what happens?
Well, if you put people in, do people then think, oh, it's one Buchanan, I'll read it.
I just don't know.
I don't know quite how it works.
But my own feeling is that even a reference has to have a personal aspect of conviction.
And I don't want to put people in who I think really aren't worthy, even if everybody else thinks they're wonderful.
I want there to be an element of personal judgment, which also allows me the personal pleasure of putting in people that I think are excellent, but are not highly or widely accepted as being excellent.
So obviously there's consensus over Martin Amis and Julian Barnes.
There's a worry about how many American authors I have, because after all it's English literature, but obviously major American authors have to be there because there's a lot of... But there's also an Oxford companion to American literature.
There is.
So you have to... In fact, you see, I'm just reading Jane Smiley at the moment, enjoying her enormously, but she is very American.
Have you read Jane Smiley?
Oh, I looked at her in 2008.
I love her.
It's a wonderful book.
The Moo book, I thought.
Moo.
It was delightful.
Did you read that one?
Yeah, that's funny.
I started with Moo, actually.
But, I mean, she...
No one could pretend she's an English author.
She's very American.
Except that this is Lear.
Exactly.
I think I can sneak it in.
And it's a plot, absolutely.
And Wool, by the way, is a Shakespearean comedy.
She teaches Shakespeare now.
Well, I think I can put her in.
And I'd love it.
On those grounds alone.
I should send you the interview I did with her, because her last three novels were mindfully takeoffs in Shakespearean plays.
Oh.
a history prior to this, this one, this is a tragedy, this is a comedy, you know, and very, very interesting.
But how about taking people out?
Adding people is one thing, but I would say... Well, taking people out is very difficult.
I'm going to have to, I think possibly, but this is something to do with the canon, to do with the economy of publishing a book.
I think I may take out quite a lot of medieval literature, which isn't even in English, I mean, it's in Middle English.
I think that that has become perhaps something for a separate reference book.
I mean, I could save a lot of space.
Last time, I took out from the original Harvey all the capital references because there just isn't room for that in one volume.
And I think I may make the decision, which some scholars will complain about, is taking out a lot of the medieval references because any student who's a specialist will have to have specialist references for that.
And I'm not quite sure
how useful it is for the average.
Well, that makes sense.
But how about coming forward from medieval times?
Well, I mean, I know that I've given too much coverage, for instance, to Paul Scott.
His item is ludicrously long, because I'd just read Jewel in the Crown, and my copy editor has dawed him.
And this piece just got longer and longer, and I now see it's disproportionately long.
So we just top it down a bit.
Are you alert to fashion, literary?
Maybe that's not the right word, but... Yes, I mean, I am.
I know who's in and out.
But I think one shouldn't be bound by that, because I think you can see that some people are in fashion because of a sort of quirk of publicity.
The Scottish phenomenon at the moment in England, in Britain, I should say, is very interesting, because Scottish-ness is very... I think fashion is this a word.
And now we've got to devolve at Parliament.
It may become even more so.
On the other hand, it may be that some of you like a professional or something to accept.
Who was the fellow that won that book?
Don't tell them.
That set the modern record for the F-word, I think.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Why do you have this one?
He seems a very nice man.
Very nice.
All his own cigarettes.
And a serious, a serious, right?
Yeah, but that's so much.
It was quite surprising, wasn't it?
It was.
I was in Sweden just the day after they announced this new Nobel laureate.
Oh, yeah.
Quite a shock.
Yeah, that is right.
Yeah, yeah.
People were surprised by that, yeah.
Even in Italy, I mean, I think most surprisingly.
I went to the Nobel library the day after that happened.
I'm interested in the library, which was established in 1901.
So it's parameters that right now is strictly the 20th century.
And the only books they acquire are of living authors.
Tolstoy is long dead.
People who didn't get the Nobel Prize.
And you can access that database, by the way.
And you can see, I don't know what you can draw from this, but I took very careful notes.
There were, for instance, on Tolstoy, maybe 150 kids.
Which means his name had come up, even though he never won the award.
Gibson never won the award.
Stringberg never won the award.
I mean, look at the people.
Yeah, Stringberg, the greatest Swedish writer, the Römelin, didn't win the award.
Yeah, Karin Sarkis didn't get it.
So I started Glam Green.
Glam Green had a bunch of entries in there.
I'm going to write about this, actually.
Joyce Carol Oates had 89 entries.
That means her books have been requested 89 entries.
They've been brought in, so they go out and they get them.
I thought so.
It's kind of fun.
And this woman was showing me, let me urge you not to never draw too many conclusions from those numbers.
I said, I'm alert to that, but let me also say it's very interesting.
Just the numbers.
Well, that tells you nothing, doesn't it?
Just by the frequency.
Graham Greene had a ton.
Nabokov had a few.
All these people would have been there.
But it's amazing the people who have not won the Nobel Prize, and then you look at the list of those.
But of course, there is that sort of language rotation.
I think it's more than language.
I think it's nationality and political, for sure.
I mean, Green's politics undoubtedly denied him the award.
I'm sorry to go off on a tangent here.
Well, no, I mean, it's all fascinating.
It's all kind of my own life, too.
Does a novel have to be relevant?
Well, it is to me that I enjoy novels that aren't relevant.
But to me, a novel, the kind of novels I like to write, that I'm speaking personally, tend to be about the contemporary and all about society.
But I can very much enjoy, I'm trying to think of somebody, I mean, Alan Hollinghurst, who is not really a relevant writer, who's one of the most beautiful writers.
So I appreciate that I could be right.
But to me, my own expression of art is social writing, I suppose.
And to explain that behind your own way.
No, the old one.
That's okay, don't tell me.
But I published a piece in The Guardian on Saturday, this Saturday, about the reading room.
This past Saturday?
This past Saturday.
I should probably get that on the internet, believe it or not.
You may well be able to hear it.
I find it.
It's from...
It was Saturday, October the 18th.
And the day that women were admitted into the reading room was 1762.
What period?
I'm sorry.
1762.
And they'd been admitted into the present reading room, which was 1862.
They've always been admitted into that.
I think the original reading was written in 1758 or something, and women were admitted almost immediately.
Which is rather surprising.
It really is.
Yeah.
Now where did you find that?
I found that from the archivist at the British Library, whose name is
Not John Hopkins, but it's something very light.
It's Hobson, something like that.
But his official title is The Archivist.
And I'm sure his... That is fascinating.
I'm winning out of time, I think.
Can I write you on this?
Of course, yeah.
I'll be happy to send you copies of anything I do on this.
No, that sounds very interesting.
If you could just tell me where to write you.
Fine.
Do you want a fax number or an address or what?
Fax would be fine.
I'll give you the fax number.
I like that.
Provided you don't fax me 92 pages of paper.
It'll be a one page query.
You'll know that terrified thing.
And before long you'll have an email address.
I do, but I don't know how to use it.
I won't give it to you because I'm so nervous.
Okay, well you're going to love it once you learn it.
I know, I know.
I've got the facility, but I don't.
I've emailed my son in Australia two or three times.
I'll give you my fact, it's much more allowable.
It's 0181, which is 004481, I suppose.
00... 44181 586 9265.
Now, do you and your husband still work separately apart?
No, no, we've joined before.
I've sold my house and moved in with him.
Well, that's interesting.
Has that changed the work schedule, the dynamic at all?
It has a bit.
I always complain that we get up later.
When we lived apart, we used to get up secretly early, and now we have a cup of coffee and laze around.
The day starts an hour later for both of us than it used to.
But we do have separate floors to work on, because it's a big house.
It's a big house, and we can't really hear each other.
We have a little bell that we ring, which we find more friendly than an intercom.
We ring his little bell to let each other know that we're moving around the house.
What's Michael working on now?
He's writing a family memoir.
Oh, really?
He's sort of halfway through.
I've got plenty of stuff.
Would you describe this book for me?
I would indeed.
Do you mind, by the way, if I take a photograph of you?
I'd be delighted.
Now, let me just make sure I'm spelling you right.
You're Nicholas with an inch.
Are you...
Have you been shaped by your reading, would you say?
Are you a person who has been shaped by your reading?
Yes.
By the books that you read?
I mean, if anything, I sometimes think too much, in that I hear them sounding in my head all the time, and every book I write is a sort of conversation with all the books I've ever read.
And I've been, yes, I started reading at the age of three, so my mother always said.
I think she was exaggerating a bit.
But I...
been profoundly influenced by everything I've read.
And when I say everything, I almost mean that.
My head is full of dialogue with authors, some of them long dead, and lines from parents.
And do they in any way influence or shape things that you write, do you think?
Yes.
Undoubtedly, they do.
And in a way, I think if you're a reader, it's inevitable that your head should be full of echoes.
And I think it's one of the problems of writing now, in a post-modern stage, in that our heads are all full of intertextuality and mystery illusion.
And in a way, it's one of the great blessings, because there's a long tradition of the past to talk to.
It must have been very strange living in the 17th century, and knowing there was a limit of
amount of the classics that you had to study, because there weren't any more texts to go beyond them.
Once you've done them, you've done them.
It must have been a very odd feeling.
That's funny.
You know, I think it's styrin when people worry about whether or not there will be readers for the serious books that are being written.
I think it's styrin.
They said, look, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Turgenev, they were always
was a very small percentage of the Russian people who were literate.
They were writing for a very small segment of society and look at the great novels that they wrote.
And maybe there are only a very small... Maybe there always is only a proportion of the population will ever be serious readers.
That may be true.
And it may not matter because that's the percentage, the 10% or whatever.
But even out of the literate or so-called literate community will go on reading.
So it doesn't matter that the rest of them compete again.
Do you agree with that?
I think it may be true, my optimistic self.
Well, in a way it's pessimistic because it means that other people will never have the pleasure that one has had oneself in reading.
But I don't think reading will die because I think that there will always be that 10%.
I think there will always be that number of people.
We don't know what the percent is.
It may not be 10%.
It may not even be 10%.
I mean, as a young person, I used to think it was infinitely expandable, this percentage of readers, and I used to think education was spread.
I don't believe that now.
But I thought, hello, it may be a constant of the day.
Maybe it is going to vanish.